<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>

<!DOCTYPE publicwhip
[
<!ENTITY aacute "&#225;" >
<!ENTITY eacute "&#233;" >
<!ENTITY iacute "&#237;" >
<!ENTITY oacute "&#243;" >
<!ENTITY uacute "&#250;" >
<!ENTITY yacute "&#253;" >
<!ENTITY yen    "&#165;" >

<!ENTITY Aacute "&#193;" >
<!ENTITY Acirc  "&#194;" > 
<!ENTITY Eacute "&#201;" >
<!ENTITY Iacute "&#205;" >
<!ENTITY Oacute "&#211;" >
<!ENTITY Uacute "&#218;" >
<!ENTITY zcaron  "&#381;" > 
<!ENTITY hellip  "..." >
<!ENTITY bullet  "&#8226;" >
<!ENTITY Dagger  "&#8224;" >
<!ENTITY eth  "&#240;">

<!ENTITY ndash   "&#8211;">
<!ENTITY mdash   "&#8212;">
<!ENTITY iexcl   "&#161;">
<!ENTITY divide  "&#247;">
<!ENTITY euro    "&#8364;">
<!ENTITY trade   "&#8482;">
<!ENTITY bull    "&#8226;">
<!ENTITY lsquo   "&#8216;">
<!ENTITY rsquo   "&#8217;">
<!ENTITY sbquo   "&#8218;">
<!ENTITY ldquo   "&#8220;">
<!ENTITY rdquo   "&#8221;">
<!ENTITY bdquo   "&#8222;">
<!ENTITY dagger  "&#8224;">

<!ENTITY Scaron "&#352;" >
<!ENTITY scaron "&#353;" >
<!ENTITY Ouml   "&#214;" >
<!ENTITY szlig  "&#223;" >
<!ENTITY agrave "&#224;" >
<!ENTITY acirc  "&#226;" >
<!ENTITY atilde "&#227;" >
<!ENTITY auml   "&#228;" >
<!ENTITY ccedil "&#231;" >
<!ENTITY Ccedil "&#199;" >
<!ENTITY egrave "&#232;" >
<!ENTITY ograve "&#243;" >
<!ENTITY Egrave "&#200;" >
<!ENTITY ecirc  "&#234;" >
<!ENTITY euml   "&#235;" >
<!ENTITY icirc  "&#238;" >
<!ENTITY igrave "&#204;" >
<!ENTITY iuml	"&#239;" >
<!ENTITY ntilde "&#241;" >
<!ENTITY nbsp   "&#160;" >
<!ENTITY ocirc  "&#244;" >
<!ENTITY ouml   "&#246;" >
<!ENTITY oslash "&#248;" >
<!ENTITY uuml   "&#252;" >
<!ENTITY ucirc  "&#251;" >
<!ENTITY thorn  "&#254;" >
<!ENTITY Icirc  "&#206;" >

<!ENTITY pound  "&#163;" >
<!ENTITY sect   "&#167;" >
<!ENTITY copy   "&#169;" >
<!ENTITY reg    "&#174;" >
<!ENTITY deg    "&#176;" >
<!ENTITY plusmn "&#177;" >
<!ENTITY sup2   "&#178;" >
<!ENTITY sup3   "&#179;" >
<!ENTITY micro  "&#181;" >
<!ENTITY para   "&#182;" >
<!ENTITY middot "&#183;" >
<!ENTITY ordm   "&#186;" >
<!ENTITY frac14 "&#188;" >
<!ENTITY frac12 "&#189;" >
<!ENTITY frac34 "&#190;" >
<!ENTITY oelig "&#339;" >
<!ENTITY aelig  "&#230;" >
<!ENTITY Aring  "&#197;" >
<!ENTITY aring  "&#229;" >
]>


<publicwhip scrapeversion="a" latest="yes">
    <major-heading id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.2" nospeaker="true" time="11:00:00" url="">Committee on Arrangements for Budgetary Scrutiny</major-heading>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.3" nospeaker="true" time="11:00:00" ><p>The Select Committee met at 11:00</p><p>MEMBERS PRESENT:</p><p>Deputy Seán Barrett, Deputy Pearse Doherty, Deputy Thomas P. Broughan, Deputy Stephen S. Donnelly, Deputy Dara Calleary, Deputy Hildegarde Naughton, Deputy Lisa Chambers, Deputy Noel Rock, Deputy David Cullinane, Deputy Eamon Ryan.</p><p>DEPUTY JOHN PAUL PHELAN IN THE CHAIR.</p></speech>
    <minor-heading id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.4" nospeaker="true" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#A00100">Business of Select Committee</minor-heading>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.5" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1265" speakername="John Paul Phelan" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#A00200"><p>Apologies have been received from Deputies Michael McGrath, Marc MacSharry and Joan Burton.  The first item is the minutes of the last meeting.  Are they agreed?  Agreed.  There are a couple of items of correspondence not included on the agenda as they were received late.  There is a submission from the Minister for Finance and the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform, which we will discuss.  We will also discuss Deputy Broughan's letter, if he arrives.  There is a letter from Professor Alan Barrett from the Economic and Social Research Institute who has volunteered the services of the ESRI in terms of the work of the committee, which is a welcome.  There is another letter from the Irish Tax Institute.  I also circulated a brief document.</p> <p>  Will we move on to a discussion on what the Departments submitted in terms of their own document?</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.6" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1335" speakername="Dara Calleary" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#B00100"><p>That is on the agenda for later.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.7" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1265" speakername="John Paul Phelan" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#B00200"><p>Okay.  We will begin by recapping what happened last week when we had six or seven items to deal with.  The issues raised by members are at various stages of being addressed.  We had hoped to have the legal adviser to the Oireachtas present today, but she is required at an ongoing case in the High Court.  She intends to be here next week.  We also contacted the Departments of Public Expenditure and Reform and Finance.  While the Ministers were anxious to attend today, the Cabinet is meeting this morning and they will now attend next week's meeting.  Because of the bank holiday weekend, they cannot attend this morning.  We intend to have a couple of meetings next week and perhaps we might discuss that issue at the end of the meeting.</p> <p>  I want to summarise the key issues raised by members last week and if they want to add to or amend anything, they should feel free to do so.  The issues raised were as follows: No. 1, how can the committee engage in the budgetary process and what information will be made available to it and what window of opportunity will be available to consider the issues involved?  No. 2 is how can the committee influence budgetary decision-making and how will the sectoral committees work with the budgetary oversight committee?  No. 3 is what can we learn from other jurisdictions to assist the framework being put in place by this committee?  No. 4 is that we need to address, if possible, the issue of proposals from Opposition parties and groups that involve a charge on the Exchequer and consider how they can be costed.  No. 5 is that we need to consider how we can bring transparency to policy proofing, whether it be equality, poverty or the impact on regions and regional development.  No. 6 is that we need to consider what resources will be available to assist the Oireachtas and, in particular, how the new parliamentary budget office will assist this committee in its deliberations.</p> <p>  We will examine items Nos. 1 to 3, inclusive, in more detail today.  Since our last meeting the Government has submitted its reform package which has been designed to empower the D&aacute;il to influence and critique budget allocations and priorities.  Before we discuss these two issues with the two Ministers and their officials, it is important that we consider and view them against the submission documentation prepared by the secretariat, in particular paper No. 2, which was submitted prior to the first meeting of the committee last week.  The points I made in my short submission to the committee relate to obtaining key information for the committee in a timely manner, including the advice notes given to Ministers by Secretaries General and the Government by the Departments of Finance and Public Expenditure and Reform.  This is also an attempt to address the concerns expressed by Deputy Eamon Ryan last week that we have a meaningful input into the preparation of the upcoming budget.</p> <p>  Two issues arise today where I see the committee having a larger role.  The first is the assessment of the Irish Fiscal Advisory Council of the Government's spring economic statement which deals with the potential fiscal space.  Second, it has been reported that in the Revised Estimates being considered by the Cabinet today a number of Votes will provide for revised expenditure ceilings.  They are to do with Garda overtime, Department of Health overruns and hospital overcrowding.  The new budgetary oversight committee needs to be central to dealing with and on top of these issues.  I appreciate that the delays in the formation of the Government and the absence of sectoral committees make this year an outlier.  However, the issues highlighted need better oversight.</p> <p>  We have written to the Ceann Comhairle following last week's long discussion about the setting up of the parliamentary budget office and also, following Deputy Eamon Ryan's suggestion, on the issue of the sectoral committees which, once established, should immediately commence discussion of matters to do with budget preparation in their sectors.</p> <p>  Today we will work on two key elements - engagement points and the role of the committee.  The clerk's note provides an outline of proposals to be dealt with in our next two meetings.</p><p>Before we deal with specific issues today, have members any comments to make arising from last week's meeting or in respect of our draft work programme?  Are there other groups and organisations that we need to hear from or to whom we should write to seek submissions in the short term?</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.9" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1258" speakername="David Cullinane" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#C00200"><p>I welcome the secretariat paper which is very helpful and gives some shape to our work.  This follows some confusion during the last meeting in which we were all involved.  The paper has provided some welcome clarity.  The Chairman's paper was also very helpful and I agree with much of what is in it.</p> <p>  There are a number of key issues which we need to discuss and consider in depth.  First, we have a responsibility to establish a framework for what this new budgetary committee is to do.  Part of that is on the agenda today.  Second, there is the need for what is being called in the secretariat paper "a parliamentary budget office".  This is referred to in the programme for Government as an "independent budget office".  That is interesting because there are different opinions as to what independence means.  It is something we need to also consider.  Third, there are the interim measures we must take between now and the budget for 2017.  We are not going to have all of this infrastructure in place for this year's budget.</p> <p>  To stay with the secretariat paper which I think is helpful, the Chairman mentioned that points 1, 2 and 3 are potentially what we should focus on today.  In this regard points 5, 6 and 7 are very relevant to these first three points.  If one looks at the Government's paper, which we will get to later, it is very good on issues such as greater engagement, more set-piece events and more information flow.  All of that is great and we welcome it.  Where it is weak is on suggestions as to what powers this committee will have.  My reading of the terms of reference we were given is very clear that there will be no changes in terms of the Constitution or the law.  Point 5 says that we need to look at the administrative, legal and constitutional issues.  To ensure we do not waste time we need to be clear very early on about what we can and cannot do and what the terms of reference allow us to do.</p> <p>  We need to push the boat out.  The issues we raise around money Bills, equality proofing, independence with regard to costings, economic projections and so on will be critically important.  That will determine the success or otherwise of this committee.  Unfortunately, points 5, 6 and 7 are inextricably linked to points 1, 2 and 3.  Unless we receive clarity on these points, we are somewhat limited in terms of how we can shape the framework for the committee because we do not know what powers we have.  We need to hear from the Government and the relevant Ministers.  What do the Ministers think this committee is going to do?  What powers do they think we should or should not have?  What is their view of the independent costings unit?  We are going to hear from the Secretaries General of the Departments.  They might have a completely different view because there are many potential changes that could have an impact.  We need to be clear in terms of a pathway.  In the first instance we need information first from all of these stakeholders as that will help us to shape our decisions.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.10" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1265" speakername="John Paul Phelan" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#C00300"><p>I fully agree with the Deputy, which is alarming from my perspective given our politics over the years.  The Deputy's points about pushing the boat out are correct.  It this committee is to have any real purpose, we need to push out the boundaries in terms of information flow as much as anything else.</p> <p>  I also agree with the Deputy on his prioritisation of the points.  With regard to point 5 on legal advice, we must wait until our legal advisor, Ms Melissa English, is in a position to be here.  She will be here next week.  It was unforeseen that she would not be able to be here this week.  Another point has slipped my mind.  Deputy Calleary may contribute in the meantime if he wishes.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.11" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1335" speakername="Dara Calleary" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#C00400"><p>In the Government submission from the Minister for Finance, Deputy Noonan, and the Minister for Public Expenditure and Reform, Deputy Donohoe, there is no reference to the constitutional issues raised by Article 17 of the Constitution.  The submission contains many pats on the head and the Ministers say that they wish to talk to us and really listen, and it is all covered in inclusive language.  However these constitutional issues go to the nub of the question, not just for this committee but for the whole of the D&aacute;il and Seanad, in terms of the abilities of Members of the Oireachtas to make proposals that have budget implications.</p><p>A lot of the Chairman's suggestions are excellent and meaty but until we resolve that issue, or get some sort of guidance on it, we are in a vacuum.  We should be as disciplined with the vacuum as we can be today. </p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.13" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1265" speakername="John Paul Phelan" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#D00200"><p>We need to set forward our own outline today as to where we see the committee going.  The Government has made an opening statement in, as Deputy Calleary said, not perhaps the most exact language and we hope to have the two Ministers before the committee next week between 11 a.m. and 12.30 p.m.  We can question them more at that time and we will also have the legal advice.  Today we need to put some flesh on the bones.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.14" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1335" speakername="Dara Calleary" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#D00300"><p>Perhaps we could have a meeting with the legal adviser before we have a meeting with the Ministers.  The sequencing will be important.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.15" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1265" speakername="John Paul Phelan" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#D00400"><p>Yes.  It would make more sense to do that.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.16" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1335" speakername="Dara Calleary" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#D00500"><p>Committee members can then be fully briefed as to what are the barriers.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.17" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1219" speakername="Se&aacute;n Barrett" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#D00600"><p>Following on from last week, I am still not very clear.  As I understand it, the purpose of this committee is to talk for 30 days about arrangements, not the actual detail.  We should focus on the arrangements only.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.18" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1265" speakername="John Paul Phelan" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#D00700"><p>That is what we want to do today.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.19" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1219" speakername="Se&aacute;n Barrett" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#D00800"><p>We need to get at the things that are needed to enable the committee to proceed with the necessary scrutiny.  For example, we will be recommending the establishment of the parliamentary budget office and other essential elements of doing the job which the committee will need to have when it is set up.  Maybe I am wrong but it is important to focus on what we are supposed to do in this 30-day committee, rather than broadening it out.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.20" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1265" speakername="John Paul Phelan" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#D00900"><p>The Deputy is right.  Last week's meeting was preliminary and we were feeling our way a bit.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.21" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1219" speakername="Se&aacute;n Barrett" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#D01000"><p>I fully accept that.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.22" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1265" speakername="John Paul Phelan" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#D01100"><p>However, we have to stick to what our job is for the next fortnight.  Deputy Broughan made a submission.  Does he want to say anything on the principal points?</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.23" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1361" speakername="Tommy Broughan" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#D01200"><p>Not really.  I wrote down what I thought with regard to the general view of the committee a few hours after the meeting.  We need to hear from the people who have experience of this and their ideas of how a budget committee could operate.  This might include people in universities and other academics as well as people from other jurisdictions.  I agree with Deputy Barrett that we should then agree the arrangements for the actual budget scrutiny committee.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.24" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1294" speakername="Eamon Ryan" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#D01300"><p>In answer to Deputy Barrett, our job is to put in place the processes and in this respect the Government submission to the select committee on arrangements for budgetary scrutiny helps us to outline the milestones and the timelines.  As the secretariat said last week, the best thing we could do is to slightly test the timeline and the process and the best way of doing so is to apply what we do to the 2017 budget.  That would allow us to recommend structures and processes.</p> <p>  I have a couple of concerns.  I understand that at the conclusion of our meeting last week, we were to try to get the Secretaries General from the Department of Public Expenditure and Reform and the Department of Finance to come before us today.  The explanation that there was a Cabinet meeting or that we had a bank holiday weekend is not good enough as Secretaries General do not sit on tenterhooks at the side of, or next door to, a Cabinet meeting.  At the update of the stability programme Deputy Stephen S. Donnelly fulminated against the late arrival of the report to the Parliament and I was also very angry at that.</p><p>Subsequently, I heard a friend in the Department of Finance say that they only heard it at the last minute as well and that it was the politicians who forced them to do it at the last minute.  We have to be careful.</p><p> I am surprised we do not have the Secretaries General of the Departments of Finance and Public Expenditure and Reform here today because given our timeline, that would have been appropriate.  To a certain extent, it is important we meet them before we meet the Ministers.  Having half an hour with the Ministers, Deputies Noonan and Donohoe, would be welcome but, to be honest, for our work, it would be better to have Secretaries General or their relevant staff here to tease out some of the details of this.</p><p> When it comes to what they set out in terms of their submission, I have a slight concern, and this is an example of how we can tease it out.  What they are effectively saying in the consideration of the spring-summer economic statement and the stability programme update is that it would be presented to the D&aacute;il and then we would review it afterwards.  It is a continuation of after-the-fact assessment rather than considering the options and what one thinks before it is written.  As a rule, we should try to do this before rather than after it is presented in the D&aacute;il.</p><p> When it comes to the mid-year expenditure report, they suggest in their note that as part of that expenditure report, which would be available at the end of June, they would set out aggregate level ceilings for 2017-2019 at the Vote level.  I have a concern that aggregate levels do not really tell one much.  The submission goes on to state: "Following the publication of the report, it would be open to the Oireachtas sectoral committees to review the priorities and challenges for each Vote Group."  Maybe that allows for us to do this.  The real purpose here, and the reason I was pushing it last week, is that in June and July, before we break for the summer, the sectoral committees need to get into the finer detail of that expenditure, line-by-line and proposal-by-proposal, and not into aggregate Vote assessments.  Then the Oireachtas sectoral committee would be properly prepared to assist the Minister in looking at the options.  This is good in that it brings us to a next stage but it is bad in the sense that the Secretaries General are not here to answer any questions we might have about it.  Given the timeline we face, that is a real disappointment.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.26" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1265" speakername="John Paul Phelan" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#E00200"><p>As I said at that start, a number of factors emerged, not least the Government meeting today but also the case in which the legal adviser is potentially involved in the courts.  On Deputy Calleary's point, there is no disagreement.  We should try to hear from her first to understand the legal space in which we can operate.  I do not have a particular problem if Deputy Eamon Ryan is proposing that we should have the Secretaries General in before the Ministers.  Is that the view of the committee?</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.27" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1258" speakername="David Cullinane" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#E00300"><p>Yes.  However, there is still confusion in some respects.  Unless we get clarity from the start, we will end up going around in circles.  We have terms of reference which were set down by the Government.  The problem in the process so far - I am being helpful and constructive in saying this - is that we have not had any outline of what those terms of reference are.  The Government has set out a terms of reference.  That, whether we like it or not, will place some limitations on us which we may not agree with and we can go back and, as I said, push the boat out.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.28" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1294" speakername="Eamon Ryan" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#E00400"><p>On a point of order-----</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.29" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1265" speakername="John Paul Phelan" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#E00500"><p>Hold on a second.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.30" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1258" speakername="David Cullinane" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#E00600"><p>We have not had that.  If we got that, at least we would know.  Obviously, the Government has a view on what it wants the committee to do and on what it wants this costings unit to be.  We have terms of reference which are to enable the set up in terms of process, structure, etc.  However, we are still operating under terms of reference that we have not gone through.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.31" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1265" speakername="John Paul Phelan" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#E00700"><p>Today, we want to flesh that out ourselves.  I would point out that the Government did not draft the terms of reference.  It was the D&aacute;il reform group which did that.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.32" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1258" speakername="David Cullinane" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#E00800"><p>The Oireachtas has mandated us but we have a terms of reference.  I am assuming the Government will have its view.  The programme for Government deals with some of this.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.33" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1265" speakername="John Paul Phelan" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#E00900"><p>In his comments, Deputy Eamon Ryan probably struck the nail on the head in relation to the deficiency which I saw in the Department's submission as well.  It was very much angled towards examining events after the fact rather than having a sufficient role, which I originally envisaged for this committee, in advance of the preparation of the different stages in the budgetary process.  We must have that discussion with the Secretaries General and the Ministers when they are here.</p> <p>  Today, I am anxious that we would, as Deputy Cullinane said, flesh out where we see our own role.</p><p>We have been given riding orders by the parliamentary reform committee but today - before we even meet the Ministers and Secretaries General or obtain the legal advice - we will be receiving a presentation on the option papers that were circulated in advance of the first meeting.  The presentation will deal with how we envisage our role before we have any discussions with outside bodies.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.35" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1315" speakername="Hildegarde Naughton" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#F00200"><p>The Chairman's proposals are a very good starting point in that they relate to this year and the time constraints that apply.  Even as a first step, I would be very much in favour of acting on them because they relate to this year, 2016.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.36" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1265" speakername="John Paul Phelan" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#F00300"><p>It is an attempt to fill a vacuum that exists in the context of this year's budget.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.37" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1315" speakername="Hildegarde Naughton" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#F00400"><p>We should proceed with that.  I am very much in favour of what the Chairman has proposed as a good starting point.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.38" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1219" speakername="Se&aacute;n Barrett" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#F00500"><p>Deputy Eamon Ryan has made a number of points with which I completely agree.  They should be included in our 30-day report.  That is what we are here for.  It is not about examining the Estimates for 2016 or 2017.  We are here to make suggestions, and the ones Deputy Eamon Ryan offered make perfect sense.  They would eventually inform the proceedings of the budgetary committee that would be set up after our temporary committee has concluded its proceedings.  I formally propose that.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.39" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1288" speakername="Pearse Doherty" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#F00600"><p>I apologise for being delayed.  I picked up on what Deputy Eamon Ryan said.  His point is very similar to the one he made last week.  I agree with Deputy Se&aacute;n Barrett that our job is to facilitate the coming into being of a budgetary committee.  If we focus on half a job, which is to try to get that up and running, with an intersection at some point with the budgetary cycle - which has already started for this year - we will be trying to create half a horse.  We should examine the whole package.  What we recommend will not only be for this year but also for the years to come and for scenarios in which there may not be a minority Government.  Therefore, we must put forward proposals that will stand the test of time and allow the Parliament to have greater involvement in the delivery of a budget and the progress on formulating one.  Once we have sorted out the type of framework in which we want to operate, we could make interim suggestions on how we should intersect with the budgetary cycle this year.  I agree with the points made in this regard but our focus has to be on moving away from this year's budget to examining and agreeing on the framework in which we will need to operate every year from now on.</p> <p>  The second part of the work concerns the independent costings unit.  We should then examine the interim measures we want to recommend to the D&aacute;il, which concern how we would intersect with this year's budgetary cycle.  The reality is that, whatever we propose - I am not predetermining it - we will be able to fulfil it completely for budget 2017.  Recommendations will, therefore, have to be made on how best to achieve a result in the spirit of what the committee intends, whether it involves getting sectoral committees' recommendations to start working straightaway on a certain basis or otherwise.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.40" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1265" speakername="John Paul Phelan" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#F00700"><p>We are going to go into private session in order to allow Mr. Tom Malone to present some of the options.</p> <p>  On Deputy Eamon Ryan's suggestion about the Secretaries General, I acknowledge we have power to order our own business as a committee.  Traditionally, Ministers have appeared before committees and outlined the position of the Government and the Secretaries General, officials or others might have dealt with the finer points of implementation or policy thereafter.  There could be some resistance involving the Secretaries General before the Ministers' appearance next week.  Does it matter?</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.41" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1294" speakername="Eamon Ryan" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#F00800"><p>I am sure there will be resistance.  That is all the more reason to push against it.  This committee's remit was given by the D&aacute;il reform committee, not by the Government.  There were extensive discussions at meetings of the D&aacute;il reform committee on the legal aspects.  We do not need to get caught up in a legal quagmire.</p><p> We have already discussed a lot of the legal powers around money Bills and so on.  While the committee should bring in legal advice, we should not tie ourselves up in legal knots.  This is central to D&aacute;il reform, part of which is reform of the public service.  As much as I respect what Deputy Pearse Doherty had to say, the D&aacute;il reform committee and the Taoiseach himself said in the D&aacute;il that part of how this is done is actually in the doing.  How do we know what to write, if we do not get the Secretaries General into the committee to tease out matters?  I am not saying they are the devil incarnate.  However, it would be good to hear from them because they might have reasons for this.  The only way to find out what the real reasons, or the real arguments, are is through the actual sharing of information about this economic statement due to be published next week.  We must intersect on that and actually test to see could we review it before it is printed.  That is how one finds out where the power lines between the permanent Government and the Parliament lie.  That is a not a small task to work out and one cannot do it if the permanent Government is not here.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.43" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1265" speakername="John Paul Phelan" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#G00200"><p>I understand what the Deputy is saying.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.44" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1294" speakername="Eamon Ryan" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#G00300"><p>One cannot do it if it is not a real-world discussion.  It must be done in real time and, as one we are doing that, we must be set up the full committee.  This session is only going to last for one month or two months but we should do the June and July stuff.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.45" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1265" speakername="John Paul Phelan" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#G00400"><p>We are an arrangements committee.  I agree with the Deputy&rsquo;s point that there will be some element of overlap.  However, we have a little bit more than two weeks to produce our set of guidelines, as mentioned by Deputies Barrett and Pearse Doherty, as to how the committee will operate.  There will be a natural overlap with the process which is ongoing from a budgetary point of view.  Our task is to set up the actual budgetary oversight committee.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.46" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1294" speakername="Eamon Ryan" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#G00500"><p>That is why I am disappointed that they are not here today.  That is a delaying tactic.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.47" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1265" speakername="John Paul Phelan" time="11:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/CAB2016060800002#G00600"><p>Perhaps but I could not physically drag them here.  We will move on to the option papers circulated to members in advance of the first meeting.  This discussion will be held in private session.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.48" nospeaker="true" time="11:00:00" ><p>The select committee went into private session at 11.30 a.m. and adjourned at 1.35 p.m. until 11 a.m. on Wednesday, 15 June 2016.</p></speech>
    <major-heading id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.49" nospeaker="true" time="14:30:00" url="">Select Committee on Standing Order 112</major-heading>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.50" nospeaker="true" time="14:30:00" ><p>The Select Committee met at 14:30</p><p>MEMBERS PRESENT:</p><p>Deputy Maria Bailey, Deputy Michael Harty, Deputy Seán Crowe, Deputy Fiona O'Loughlin, Deputy Timmy Dooley, Deputy Anne Rabbitte, Deputy Peter Fitzpatrick, Deputy Brendan Ryan. Deputy Sean Fleming,</p><p>DEPUTY COLM BROPHY IN THE CHAIR.</p></speech>
    <minor-heading id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.51" nospeaker="true" time="14:30:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/SO12016060800002#A00100">Scrutiny of EU Legislative Proposals</minor-heading>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.52" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1310" speakername="Colm Brophy" time="14:30:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/SO12016060800002#A00200"><p>For the purposes of the broadcasting services, I draw members' attention to the necessity to switch off mobile phones or put them in safe, airplane or flight mode.  It is not sufficient simply to put them in silent mode.</p><p>Today the committee will consider two new EU draft legislative proposals as outlined on the agenda, one of which is listed for further consideration, COM (2016) 198.  We are joined by officials from the Department of Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation to assist us in our consideration of this proposal.  The directive concerns the disclosure of income tax information by certain undertakings and branches.  The committee has examined it twice before and at the last meeting it was decided to seek additional information.  On behalf of the committee, I welcome Ms Sabha Greene and Mr. John Moynihan from the Department of Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation.</p><p>By virtue of section 17(2)(<i>l</i>) of the Defamation Act 2009, witnesses are protected by absolute privilege in respect of their evidence to the committee.  However, if they are directed by it to cease giving evidence on a particular matter and continue to so do, they are entitled thereafter only to qualified privilege in respect of their evidence.  They are directed that only evidence connected with the subject matter of these proceedings is to be given and asked to respect the parliamentary practice to the effect that, where possible, they should not criticise or make charges against any person or an entity by name or in such a way as to make him, her or it identifiable.</p><p>Members are reminded of the long-standing parliamentary practice to the effect that they should not comment on, criticise or make charges against a person outside the Houses or an official either by name or in such a way as to make him or her identifiable.</p><p>I invite Ms Greene to make her opening statement.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.53" speakerid="unknown" error="nomatch" speakername="Ms Sabha Greene" time="14:30:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/SO12016060800002#A00300"><p>In April the European Commission adopted the proposal for a directive amending the accounting directive - 2013/34/EC - on the disclosure of income tax information by certain undertakings and branches.  The European Council&rsquo;s working party on company law has since met twice to discuss it.  The emphasis so far at the meetings has been on seeking clarifications and gaining an understanding of the detail.  Issues aired include whether this is more appropriately a matter for tax law than company law; the consequences for clarity, consistency and compliance of placing this requirement in the accounting directive, given that accounting and tax provisions can use different terms and concepts; and the application of the proposal to undertakings based outside the European Union.</p> <p> The Dutch Presidency plans to hold a third meeting next month.  We do not yet know of the Slovakian Presidency's ambitions but as of this morning, it seems it intends to hold a meeting once a month from now on during the term of its Presidency, for the next five months, excluding August.  At the same time as we in the Council are considering the matter, the European Parliament has assigned lead responsibility to the legal affairs committee but, again, as of of this morning, I understand this may change to the economic affairs committee.  This negotiation is really at a very early stage and we in the Department have not yet taken a position on the proposal.  We are still assessing its extent and impact and examining the results of the public consultation which closed just a little over two weeks ago. </p> <p> As the proposal very clearly covers tax matters, we are also in consultation with the Department of Finance.  Nevertheless, we have already identified some technical concerns, mainly relating to the approach that has been taken of inserting tax provisions into an accounting law measure and also with the obligations it purports to place on subsidiaries and branches of non-EU enterprises.  I will give members an idea of where the Commission is coming from - after all it is its proposal.  It views this proposal as part of its work to tackle corporate tax avoidance in Europe.  It supplements the recently adopted directive on administrative co-operation.  Members may know that is a tax directive which obliges large multinationals to report corporation taxes paid on a country by country basis.  The report is made to the relevant tax authorities.  The directive also provides for those authorities to share that information with each other.  That is the EU implementation of the OECD's new rules on tax avoidance.</p> <p> The information under the directive on administrative co-operation will remain confidential to the tax authorities so the Commission now considers that information prepared by companies under that directive should also be made public.  The main objective in today's proposal is to increase corporate tax transparency.  Related to that objective, the Commission hopes that public scrutiny of corporate tax arrangements will make those companies more accountable and encourage them to pay taxes where they make their profits.  It also views this proposal as addressing tax competition; it argues that multinational corporations can pay up to a third less tax than companies operating in just one country.  Finally, it expects the proposal to foster corporate responsibility to contribute to welfare through taxes.</p> <p> I will turn now to the main features and content of the proposal.  The Commission's proposal will apply to multinational companies, regardless of whether they are European, that are based in or have a subsidiary or branch in the European Union.  They must also have a consolidated net turnover exceeding &euro;750 million.  That threshold has been taken from the directive on administrative co-operation so it is to match its scope.  The companies that must make reports to the tax authorities under that directive will have to produce public reports under this proposal.  </p> <p> Looking only at companies located in Ireland, the Revenue Commissioners have assessed that approximately 47 companies would come within scope here.  They have not broken down that figure into indigenous and other enterprises, as the committee had hoped to hear.  The committee has also asked me to address the likelihood of the threshold of &euro;750 million being amended in future.  Clearly we are just at the start of the negotiations so it is difficult to tell the direction things may take but we know from recent events that the European Parliament put forward a similar proposal last year in the negotiations on a directive on shareholder rights.  The scope at that stage suggested by the Parliament was to cover undertakings with more than 500 employees and either a balance sheet total of more than &euro;86 million or a net turnover of more than &euro;100 million.  Some stakeholders have already said the Commission's threshold of &euro;750 million is too high.</p> <p>The content of the proposal moves on to put an obligation on these companies to disclose tax information.  The key obligation is to prepare a report that sets out the corporation tax that the multinational pays in each member state where it has operations, known as country-by-country reporting.  The same information must be provided for each non-co-operative tax jurisdiction or tax haven the multinational is active in.  For the rest of the world, the multinational need only give an aggregated figure for all corporation tax paid.  It has a breakdown for each of the 28 member states in which it operates and then there is a single figure for the rest of the world.</p> <p> The exception of the single figure is if any of the countries outside the EU is a tax haven, that has to be broken down as well.  The report then has to be posted on the company's website and filed with a state register of companies.  In Ireland, that is the Companies Registration Office.</p> <p> The committee in its advance questions raised the question of currency conversion.  The proposal permits the companies to produce the report in the same currency as they produce their financial statements.  There is no obligation to convert to euro if their financial statements are prepared in, say, dollars or yen.</p> <p> I refer to the impact on subsidiaries and branches.  The Commission&rsquo;s intention is that multinationals headquartered outside the EU but conducting business in the EU will disclose the same corporation tax information as EU undertakings.  The idea is to level the playing field between EU and non-EU undertakings.  The proposal gives effect to that objective by placing obligations on the subsidiaries and branches of those companies that are located in the EU where the parent company is located outside the EU.  The proposal provides that any subsidiary that meets the size requirements for a medium or large undertaking and has a parent outside the EU with a net consolidated turnover of &euro;750 million will have to make public corporation tax reports.  These will be consolidated at the level of the ultimate parent.  Where a non-EU company does not have a medium or large subsidiary in the EU but has one or more medium or large branches, the obligation falls on the branch.  It remains the obligation of the parent to put the report together.  The Department is concerned that a subsidiary or branch could be legally obliged to publish information that it does not have access to, as the information is within the ken only of the parent.  We have raised this issue and will see whether it can be accommodated in any final text.</p> <p> There is also a proposal concerning non-co-operative tax jurisdictions.  The general rule is that any tax paid outside the EU is just disclosed on a single aggregated basis.  However, there is an exception if the multinational pays taxes in a country referred to in the proposal as a non-co-operative tax jurisdiction.  In the case of taxes paid in those places, the multinational must break down those taxes on a country-by-country basis, in the same way as it does for each member state.  To identify those non-co-operative tax jurisdictions, the proposals provide that the Commission will prepare a list of those countries.  This will be done by delegated act.  It will, therefore, be done by the Commission but in consultation with parliament and member states.  This element of the proposal was developed by the Commission at a late stage and, therefore, it does not feature in the impact assessment.  It has drawn criticism for a number of reasons.  Those who call for more comprehensive country-by-country reporting see no reason for a list because they just want a breakdown for every country a company has an operation in.  If the list remains, there is a concern is that the list would be subject to change.  This year, a company has to report its tax paid in country X where next year it will not.  It makes it difficult to compare from one year to another.  How a company gets on and off the list is also seen as arbitrary.  Our view is that any assessment of the tax status of countries is one for tax authorities and Finance Ministers based on tax principles.  At last month's ECOFIN meeting, Ministers agreed to prepare a similar list for tax purposes and, therefore, we have questioned whether there is any need for a second separate list at all.</p> <p> The committee then asked about the public consultation we ran in the Department, which closed in late May.  We received seven submissions, although we understand that there may be one or two more on the way.  It is our intention to post all of them on the Department&rsquo;s website in the coming week or so and we will let the committee know when that happens.</p> <p>The results can be summarised as follows.  Five of the respondents welcomed the proposal.  They considered the objective of enhanced transparency of profits and taxes, broken down on a country-by-country basis to be an important one.  For some, the information would be important for developing countries as well as just for public interest, as those countries may not have access to this information through the OECD's exchange of tax information.</p> <p> However, most of those in favour considered that the proposal fell short in some respects.  In particular, they called for full country-by-country reporting not just for the EU.  In other words they want tax payments broken down for every country where a multinational has operations.  Related to this was a lack of support for the list of the non-co-operative tax jurisdictions, as it could be said this would be arbitrary, subject to change and would be likely to exclude large and important jurisdictions.  Another criticism was that the threshold was too high. </p> <p> The other two submissions could be broadly said to be not supportive.  They argued that it could lead to a release of commercially sensitive information and that the data could be misinterpreted, which in turn could give rise to reputational damage for companies.  There was also the view that the proposal is a hasty response to developments such as the Panama papers; that it would be better to wait for an assessment of the OECD exchange of tax information first; and that a more effective approach might be to revise international accounting standards which, of course, would cover all companies not just those with operations in the EU.</p> <p> We are currently assessing all the submissions and we are likely to go back to some of the organisations for further information or clarity.  All the views will be considered in refining our position and in discussing it with the Minister in the coming weeks. </p> <p> I hope that I have addressed the questions the committee raised in its letter.  If not or if committee members have any other questions, Mr. John Moynihan and I are available now or if anything arises as the negotiations progress in the coming months.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.57" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1310" speakername="Colm Brophy" time="14:45:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/SO12016060800005#D00200"><p>I thank Ms Greene for her opening remarks.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.58" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1216" speakername="Se&aacute;n Fleming" time="14:45:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/SO12016060800005#D00300"><p>We are at the early stages and will not conclude anything here in the near future because we are still awaiting the outcome of the submissions.  I have one important question.  How many of the enterprises are indigenous Irish enterprises?  We have asked that question.  It affects entities with a turnover in excess of &euro;750 million.  Many of them are headquartered here, but many of them are indigenous Irish companies.  How will it affect what we would call Irish indigenous business?  We will get that information back from the Department in due course.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.59" speakerid="unknown" error="nomatch" speakername="Ms Sabha Greene" time="14:45:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/SO12016060800005#D00400"><p>I cannot say that I can give it to the committee because I have asked the Revenue Commissioners for that and they were not in a position to break it down for us.  I will, of course, ask again and see if it is possible.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.60" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1216" speakername="Se&aacute;n Fleming" time="14:45:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/SO12016060800005#D00500"><p>Could the Department contact anybody else?  Surely, it is not only a Revenue issue.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.61" speakerid="unknown" error="nomatch" speakername="Ms Sabha Greene" time="14:45:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/SO12016060800005#D00600"><p>Not that I know of, but we can check.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.62" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1216" speakername="Se&aacute;n Fleming" time="14:45:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/SO12016060800005#D00700"><p>I would not like the committee at any stage to sign off on something without knowing the impact on Irish indigenous companies.  It would not be right for us to conclude without knowing what we are concluding.  That is my main point.  We have to receive that information in some format.  It could be estimates from the Department of Jobs, Enterprise and Innovation, the CSO or Revenue; I do not mind where it might come from.  I am sure there is some way of giving us some kind of indication of the types of Irish companies affected.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.63" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1309" speakername="Se&aacute;n Crowe" time="14:45:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/SO12016060800005#D00800"><p>Everyone would agree that more transparency in this area is welcome.  However, when one digs down, everyone has different views on what we mean by transparency.  This is the difficulty with this proposal.</p>  <p>  The &euro;750 million threshold is far too high.  Ms Greene mentioned the recommendation to change this to 500 employees.</p>  <p>  On country-by-country reporting for MNC operations in EU states, we know that some EU states use their former colonies and tax-avoidance schemes.  Again, no one seems to be looking at that.  It seems to be just within the EU itself.  The significant avoidance measures in which they are engaging are starving developing countries of much-needed legitimate tax revenues through processes such as tax pricing, paying tax in an EU state at a reduced rate and other loopholes.  This has been highlighted by Christian Aid and some other organisations.</p> <p>Do the delegates believe the reputational damage mentioned in the document will have an effect on Ireland's reputation, particularly as some say it is an enabler of massive tax avoidance schemes?  The last Government talked about doing away with the double Irish tax structure, despite having denied for years that it actually was in place.  Huge profitable companies have used it such as Google, Microsoft and so on.  We know this as there have been investigations.  However, they still have until 2021 to restructure their tax avoidance measures.  Will these new measures pick up on this or is it a separate issue?  Is implementation of the so-called knowledge box measures another tax avoidance measure?</p> <p> As I said, everyone is in favour of tax transparency - I am sure the multinationals which use these schemes are publicly in favour of it - but the problem is that it is not being implemented.  We are looking at the issue within the European Union but, as many others and I argue, we should be looking at it across all countries where multinationals are involved.  While I accept that there are problems with the sensitivities, if we are serious about making the measures work, that is only way it will happen.  Some companies take their own measures, while some countries, even within the European Union, operate legitimate tax loopholes.  Unless we agree to commonality across the board, something on which there is no agreement, we are faced with this problem.  Nonetheless, there is broad consensus, particularly among those dealing with developing countries, that this needs to happen across the board in all countries, not just within the European Union.  That may all sound like a statement rather than a question, but there are questions within it.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.65" speakerid="unknown" error="nomatch" speakername="Ms Sabha Greene" time="14:55:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/SO12016060800006#E00200"><p>The main objective from the Commission's point of view is to improve transparency.  Clearly, if this measure is brought in, Irish companies will have to meet their obligations.  The Commission is also trying to bring in companies that do not have their headquarters in the European Union by placing obligations on subsidiaries and branches and trying to get them to release the information in order that this measure will have, for want of a better word, an extraterritorial effect.</p>  <p>  Tax measures in Ireland, the knowledge box and any other arrangement really are matters for the Department of Finance on which to comment.  I believe the reason the Commission has included these proposals in the accounting directive is that it sees it as more of a regular financial reporting obligation.  It is, therefore, trying to match it with companies' other obligations to produce and file their annual accounts in order that third parties, including creditors, will be able to assess the financial health or otherwise of those with whom they are dealing.  If it comes in, this will be the same as every other EU country and it is meant to improve transparency.  The Commission hopes it will stimulate public debate and that the debate will move to talking about tax rules and what people in member states want as their tax rules.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.66" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1310" speakername="Colm Brophy" time="14:55:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/SO12016060800006#E00300"><p>If no one else wishes to contribute, I wish to raise a couple of points.  </p>  <p>  I thank Ms Greene for an excellent contribution.  The point I took from it very clearly was there effectively seemed to be a back-door mechanism which was being employed by the Commission to integrate with the tax rather than the accounting-reporting area.  Effectively, what we are really looking at is a mechanism within this proposal which very much brings in areas of taxation.  While I accept and acknowledge the contributions made by Deputy Se&aacute;n Crowe on transparency and the work done by the last Government and the views of the Government and most other people on the need for transparency, I have a particular worry in this regard.</p> <p>I am particularly concerned that in any subsidiarity proposal examined by the committee tax policy is an issue for the member state and not for the Commission.  Ms Greene made reference on a number of occasions to accounting terminology, which is effectively tax terminology, and the differences between them.  The more we look at this and see what it attempts to do, I am concerned it is going fairly directly into the tax area and bringing the Commission into the tax area.  Is there a feeling, particularly in the Department, that the more the threshold of &euro;750 million decreases, the more Irish companies will get involved in this?  I raised this point at the previous meeting.  Some of the requirements are effectively tax reporting requirements and not accounting requirements.  Is this a fair assumption?</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.68" speakerid="unknown" error="nomatch" speakername="Ms Sabha Greene" time="15:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/SO12016060800007#F00200"><p>We are still at a very early stage in trying to work out the impact of all of this and how it will work in practice if it is adopted.  It is very complicated.  It takes some tax ideas and it has many hallmarks of a tax instrument.  It speaks about a list of non-co-operative tax jurisdictions.  It uses the word "turnover", which means different things in accounting and tax.  It mixes in concepts of residency.  Many people have argued it is a tax instrument and should be dealt with as such.  It has come to us as a company law issue, so we must engage with it on this basis.  We are dealing very closely with the Department of Finance.  It is possible that the Council could decide to move it into the realm of tax, but this has not happened.  I do not know how likely it is.  It is very hard to say.  I cannot emphasise enough how early it is for all 28 member states, which are still grappling with it.</p>  <p>  The Commission would argue this is an important issue for small and medium-sized enterprises because they are not in a position to take advantage of paying tax in different jurisdictions in the way multinationals are.  I do not advocate one way or another, I am just stating the background.  It states these companies already have to produce this information for tax authorities so there is no additional burden in making it public.  One could see it both ways.  I am sorry not to come down on one side or the other, but there is so much in it that looks like a tax instrument while at the same time it does look like a financial reporting instrument.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.69" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1310" speakername="Colm Brophy" time="15:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/SO12016060800007#F00300"><p>To go back to the second point I made, the &euro;750 million threshold is critical.  Deputy Fleming raised the point that a number of Irish companies are affected and Ms Greene gave us a global figure of 47.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.70" speakerid="unknown" error="nomatch" speakername="Ms Sabha Greene" time="15:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/SO12016060800007#F00400"><p>That is in Ireland.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.71" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1310" speakername="Colm Brophy" time="15:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/SO12016060800007#F00500"><p>There is no breakdown on whether they are indigenous companies or multinationals operating here.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.72" speakerid="unknown" error="nomatch" speakername="Ms Sabha Greene" time="15:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/SO12016060800007#F00600"><p>No.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.73" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1310" speakername="Colm Brophy" time="15:00:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/SO12016060800007#F00700"><p>There does not seem to be any prohibition on this.  If the threshold figure were to be substantially reduced during the negotiation process there would be an equivalent increase in the number of companies based here which would be affected by the regulation.  By definition, although we do not know because we do not have the breakdown, it would probably bring in an awful lot more Irish companies because the big multinationals that get named all the time are probably captured already in the 47.  Therefore, it would really start to kick in and affect Irish companies.</p>  <p>  Does anybody have additional questions?</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.74" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1310" speakername="Colm Brophy" time="15:05:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/SO12016060800008#G00100"><p>Are there any additional questions?</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.75" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1309" speakername="Se&aacute;n Crowe" time="15:05:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/SO12016060800008#G00200"><p>In terms of the multinationals currently availing of tax avoidance measures, some of which will not come to an end until 2021, if this is introduced, will those measures remain in force for those companies?  Will those special deals remain or will the measures come to an end overnight?</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.76" speakerid="unknown" error="nomatch" speakername="Ms Sabha Greene" time="15:05:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/SO12016060800008#G00300"><p>This does not affect rates of tax or any rules on tax.  All it does is oblige companies to disclose publicly what corporation tax they pay and to break that down for each member state.  It does not actually get at changing tax.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.77" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1310" speakername="Colm Brophy" time="15:05:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/SO12016060800008#G00400"><p>Does Ms Greene have any information on how many Irish jobs there are in those 47 companies?  I would imagine they are very major employers of Irish people, particularly as some of them are among our biggest companies.  Does she have any idea how many thousands of Irish peoples' jobs could be affected?</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.78" speakerid="unknown" error="nomatch" speakername="Ms Sabha Greene" time="15:05:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/SO12016060800008#G00500"><p>I do not have that information with me but I can look into the matter for the committee.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.79" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1310" speakername="Colm Brophy" time="15:05:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/SO12016060800008#G00600"><p>As there are no further questions, I thank Mr. Moynihan and Ms Greene for attending and for fielding questions from members.  We will now go into private session.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.80" nospeaker="true" time="15:05:00" ><p>The select committee went into private session at 3.05 p.m. and resumed in public session at 3.30 p.m.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.81" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1310" speakername="Colm Brophy" time="15:10:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/SO12016060800009#N00100"><p>There were two proposals before the committee for decision, ranging from the Schengen measure to the proposal on tax disclosure.  On COM (2016) 290 - Schengen visas for third country nationals, on the basis that there are no apparent subsidiarity concerns, it is proposed that this proposal does not warrant further scrutiny.  However, it is suggested it be scrutinised further by the relevant sectoral committee once it is established.  Is that agreed?  Agreed.</p>  <p>  On COM (2016) 198 - disclosure of income tax information in certain undertakings and branches, the committee is of the opinion that there has been a breach of subsidiarity.  Therefore, it is proposed to send a reasoned opinion to the EU institution.  A reasoned opinion must be proposed and agreed to by way of a motion of the House.  Members should be aware that the deadline is 15 June.  Is that agreed?  Agreed.  </p>  <p>  It is proposed that the committee adjourn until 10 a.m. tomorrow when we will consider the report on the reasoned opinion.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.82" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1309" speakername="Se&aacute;n Crowe" time="15:10:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/SO12016060800009#N00200"><p>Will we be considering the motion tomorrow?</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.83" speakerid="com.kildarestreet/member/1310" speakername="Colm Brophy" time="15:10:00" url="http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/committeetakes/SO12016060800009#N00300"><p>Yes.  Is that agreed?  Agreed.  I thank everyone for attending.</p></speech>
    <speech id="com.kildarestreet/committees/2016-06-08a.84" nospeaker="true" time="15:10:00" ><p>The select committee adjourned at 3.35 p.m. until 10 a.m. on Thursday, 9 June 2016.</p></speech>
</publicwhip>